THE REHABILITATION POTENTIAL OF DAM REMOVAL:
TEMPORAL PERSPECTIVE FROM MICHIGAN’S PAST DAM REMOVALS
Chapter Three of a 2007 Dissertation entitled:
Effects of Dam Removal on Fluvial Geomorphology and Fish
By Bryan A. Burroughs
Professor Daniel B. Hayes
Department of Fisheries & Wildlife
Michigan State University
13 Natural Resources, East Lansing, MI 48824-1222
www.fw.msu.edu
517-353-6697

________________________________________________________________

INTRODUCTION
Dam removal has become a popular technique for stream restoration in the
United States. The optimism for this technique to achieve restoration of stream
ecosystems is based on the knowledge that dams critically alter the form and
functioning of rivers. Often, the removal of dams is assumed to restore the original form
and functioning of river systems, ameliorating the negative impacts of the dam’s
existence. To date, the strength of this assumption has largely overshadowed the need
for evidence of the benefits of dam removals, as the rate of removing dams continues to
increase and little empirical evidence of the benefits of dam removal exists. If the
practice of removing dams is to be justified as a tool for stream improvement, and
advances made in dam removal methods, then knowledge of the outcomes of dam
removals needs to be documented.
Currently, only a few studies exist that document the outcomes of dam removals.
The existing studies have focused on changes in river morphology, fish, aquatic insects,
and nutrients, and have documented that substantial changes occur immediately
following a dam removal (Hill et al. 1994, Kanehl et al. 1997, Evans et al. 2000,
Bushaw-Newton et al. 2002, Stanley et al. 2002, Chaplin 2003, Burroughs 2007a,
Burroughs 2007b). However, all of these studies have examined the effects of dam
removal over relatively short time periods following removal. The financial commitment
needed to study a dam removal for several years prior to removal, during the removal
1

phase, and for several years following a removal, can be large and limit the feasibility of
evaluating long-term response (Doyle et al. 2002, Pizzuto 2002, Gordon et al. 2004).
Large changes in streams are expected to occur immediately following a dam
removal. Many of these changes are expected to continue for long periods of time,
acquiring knowledge about the eventual outcomes of dam removal and the time
durations to achieve these outcomes, is a very challenging using conventional BeforeAfter-Control-Impact (BACI) study design. Some of the important questions regarding
dam removal may require decades to be answered. How long after a dam removal will
sediment continue to be transported? Will the river channel in the formerly impounded
area and downstream area ever resemble the original river channel? Will the dam
removal be beneficial or detrimental for resident fishes? Knowledge of the eventual
outcomes of dam removal, and the time required to achieve these outcomes is needed
to develop realistic expectations and evaluate removal methods.
Dams have many different impacts to river systems. Upstream of dams, water is
impounded, gradient is reduced, water velocity is slowed, river channels widen, and fine
sediment is deposited (Petts 1980, Ward and Stanford 1989). Downstream of dams,
temperature of water released is often warmer or colder than the normal river water
temperature. Sediment supply downstream of dams is greatly reduced, often leading to
channel degradation, a lowering of gradient and water velocity, narrowing of the river
channel, and coarsening of the substrate (Williams and Wolman 1984, Cushman 1985,
Ward and Stanford 1989, Ligon et al. 1995, Collier et al. 1996, Lessard 2000, Shields et
al. 2000). Fish species respond in varying ways to the habitat alteration and
fragmentation caused by dams (e.g., Holden 1979, Bain et al. 1988, Hayes et al. in
press). Non-native species often flourish in modified habitats (Martinez et al. 1994) and
overall species richness and diversity can decrease (Quinn and Kwak 2003). Native
species often decrease in abundance due to loss of habitat, loss of access to habitat, or
competition with non-native species (e.g., Benke 1990, Pringle et al. 2000).
In impoundments, sediment erosion occurs following dam removal, which
increases gradient and water velocity, and leads to river channel narrowing, bank
steepening, substrate coarsening, and some reformation of pools and riffles (Kanehl et
al. 1997, Stanley et al. 2002, Burroughs 2007a). Downstream of dam removals,
substantial amounts of sediment transport and deposition can occur, which increase
gradient and water velocity, aggrade the streambed, increase stream width, decrease
water depth and fill in pools and riffles (Burroughs 2007a). However, due to the
relatively short periods of time post-dam removal that these changes have been
studied, it is currently unknown how long they will take to reach an equilibrium, and what
equilibrium conditions will be (Francisco 2004, Doyle et al. 2005).
Changes to river morphology, along with the opening of fish passage, will alter
conditions for the fish community. Fish species will be able to access habitats not
previously available to them, and interact with species they did not previously interact
with. Changes in fish habitat conditions will alter the suitability of sections of the river to
the benefit of some species and the detriment of others. With each stream possessing
a unique fish species composition and unique habitat conditions, generalizations about
the effects of dam removals on fish are difficult. Given this variability of fish
communities among rivers, are there still some generalizations that will hold true for
most dam removals? After a dam removal, a larger number of fish species will be able

2

to access all habitats within a river system. Burroughs (2007a) suggests that even
within a few years after dam removal, habitat conditions will become more diverse and
heterogeneous due to dam removal. Fish communities have been observed to become
more diverse and overall productivity increased (Burroughs 2007b).
The difficulty of answering many of the crucial questions regarding dam removal
lies in the relatively long periods of time that many of these changes may take to occur.
Gathering this information could take scientists decades if not longer, using BACI
experimental designs. However, the practice of removing dams continues to grow in
frequency each year (Pohl 2003) despite the lack of this important information. These
dam removals may have detrimental effects, or at least could be conducted more
efficiently and effectively if more knowledge of the effects of dam removal was available.
In this study we attempt to answer some of the crucial questions surrounding the
eventual outcomes of dam removal, by surveying several past dam removals in
Michigan that occurred from 2 - 39 years ago.
The goal of this study was to provide insight into the extent of the changes following
dam removal and the duration of time required to realize those changes. Specifically,
the study objectives were to:
1) document differences in water temperature, slope (gradient), width/depth,
sinuosity, substrate size composition, and bedform frequencies, between
upstream reference reaches and former impoundment and downstream reaches
of dam removals, across a temporal scale of approximately 0 - 40 years post
dam removal.
2) document differences in fish community composition and fish abundance
between the reference reaches and former impoundments and downstream
reaches, across a temporal scale of approximately 0 - 40 years post-dam
removal.
METHODS
Study Design
At each past dam removal site, attributes of the fluvial geomorphology and fish
community were surveyed in the former impoundment and downstream of the dam
removal site. These were then compared to the same attributes surveyed in an
upstream reference reach, outside of the influence of the dam on stream fluvial
geomorphology. This upstream reference reach served as a surrogate for what the
river in the former impoundment and downstream reaches would look like if the dam
and the dam removal had not occurred. As such, we assume this provides a target for
rehabilitation of river form and functioning. Natural differences between these three
river reaches, not attributable to the presence of the dam or the occurrence of the dam
removal might be expected (e.g., many dams were built on high gradient sections of
stream to maximize storage potential and energy generation, and the underlying
impoundment reach would have been higher gradient than an upstream reference
reach). However, the reference reach conditions provide reasonable benchmarks for
assessing how much rehabilitation was achieved in the two zones impacted by the dam
and dam removal. If rehabilitation occurred in the area impacted by the dam and its
subsequent removal, attributes of fluvial geomorphology in these zones would be
expected to closely approach those seen in the reference reach of the river (Figure 1).

3

4

0

Time Since Dam Removal

Figure 1. Hypothetical trajectories for rehabilitation of river attributes following dam removal.

Difference from Reference Condition

Fish community attributes of a reference reach however, could not be considered
rehabilitation benchmarks since with restored fish passage following dam removal, the
fish community in the reference reach would also change. In this situation, differences
in fish community attributes can only be compared between the three zones to assess
whether any of these zones consistently ranks lower than the others, indicating
impairment.
A list of all known dam removals that have occurred in the state of Michigan was
obtained from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, Fisheries Division. From
this list of past dam removals, candidate study sites were selected to attain as wide and
uniform of a temporal distribution possible. Additionally, sites were eliminated as
candidates if the removal date was unknown or uncertain. Scouting trips were made to
many of the remaining candidate sites, and final study site selections were made based
on whether or not the former dam site could be located with certainty, logistic
considerations, and the value of the dam removal to the temporal distribution of past
dam removals (Table 1 Figure 2). Historic aerial photos were used to help identify
former dam sites and the upstream extent of the historic impoundments. These photos
were used in combination with the Delorme® digital topographic map program to
determine latitude and longitude coordinates for pertinent landmarks, and to select
study sites prior to sampling, to maximize the spatial distribution within each study zone
and eliminate site selection bias.
Table 1. Past dam removal study site information.

Dam Name
River Name

Randall
Coldwater

Stronach
Pine

L’Anse
Falls

Salling
AuSable

Smyrna
Flat

County
Year
Removed
Dam Height
Constructed

Branch
2002

Manistee
1997 2003
3.7 m
1912

Baraga
1998

Crawford
1991

Ionia
1973

Wacousta
Looking
Glass
Clinton
1966

?
?

5.2 m
1914

?
1908

1.4 m
1860

3.7 m
1912

Each study stream was broken into three study zones; the former impoundment,
the upstream reference, and a zone downstream of the dam site. The former
impoundment was delineated through the use of historic aerial photos and maps, and
confirmed in more recent dam removal sites, through use of on-ground visual cues
(former impoundments length range 318 – 5869m). The upstream reference was
chosen to start immediately adjacent to the former impoundment and extend upstream
for as long a distance as logistically feasible (references length range 1155 – 5177m), in
which the river maintained similar characteristics (e.g., it would not extend upstream of
the confluence of significant tributaries). The downstream study zones extended from
the former dam site downstream for as long as logistically feasible (downstreams length
range 624 – 3286m), while still maintaining similar characteristics (e.g., not extending
downstream of significant tributaries, or into downstream impoundments).

5

6

Randall Dam

Wacousta Dam

Smyrna Dam

Stronach Dam

Salling Dam

Figure 2. Location of study sites within the state of Michigan.

L’Anse Dam

Data Collection & Analysis
Bedforms (i.e., riffles, runs, and pools) were mapped throughout the entire study
area of each river. Bedforms were delineated following the general guidelines of Hicks
and Watson (1985), and were classified as runs, riffles, pools, rapids, waterfalls, or
complexes (a designation where more than one bedform applied). Widths and length of
each unit were measured using a Nikon® laser rangefinder (+/- 0.5m accuracy). Areas
of rivers impacted by dams were expected to be relatively homogenous run bedforms
compared to upstream reference conditions (Burroughs 2007a), and it was
hypothesized that riffle and pool bedforms would be formed following dam removal.
The diversity of bedforms in the former impoundment and downstream zones were
compared to the diversity of bedforms in reference reaches. The Shannon-Weaver
diversity index (H’)(Shannon and Weaver 1949, Ricklefs 1990) was used to estimate the
bedform diversity in each study zone. This index considers both the number of bedform
types present and the evenness of the numerical proportions of each bedform,
rewarding higher diversity values to study zones not numerically dominated by a just
one bedform type (e.g., run).
Water temperature was recorded in each study zone using Onset® water
temperature data recorders (HOBO Water Temp Pro, +/- 0.174° C). All water
temperature recorders were placed at the downstream boundaries of each study zone
(to reflect temperature effects of that zone), and recorded water temperature every 30
minutes, from July 29, 2005 through October 2, 2005.
Three sample sites, approximately 5-7 stream widths in length, were located
within each study zone. River channel cross-sectional morphology was surveyed at
both the upstream and downstream boundaries of each sample site, and the difference
between the water surface elevations at each boundary cross-section was surveyed in
order to calculate slope for the sample site. At each boundary cross section (n = 6 per
zone), elevations were recorded to the nearest 3 mm, at 0.61 m intervals across the
wetted width of the stream, and at points of inflection on the streambanks (appropriate
for the accurate mapping of bank morphology), using a level and stadia rod. Width to
depth ratio (W/D) was calculated for each cross section using the width and mean depth
of the wetted channel.
Sinuosity of each study zone was estimated from aerial photos as the straightline valley length of a section of river, divided by the actual length of the water flow
through that section of river. River measurements were made with ARC MAP (by ESRI)
software. Aerial photographs were compiled from the Michigan State University
Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Science (RSGIS) Research and Outreach
Services aerial imagery archive. If needed, photos were rectified using a Michigan
roads shapefile from the Michigan center of geographic information website. Shapefiles
of points were added to represent the three stretches of the river being measured; each
stretch of the river was measured three times and averaged. For many of the older dam
removal study sites, aerial photos had been taken in several different years since the
dams were removed. In these cases, sinuosity was repeatedly measured at several
points in time since dam removal, for individual study sites.
Substrate size composition was measured at each cross-section using a
modified pebble count method (Wolman 1954, Kondolf and Li 1992, Burroughs 2007a).
systematically sampled 100 substrate particles, from water’s edge to water’s edge

7

across the wetted width of the channel. The substrate particles were measured along
the intermediate axis and assigned a size class code (from a modified Wentworth scale)
(Wentworth 1922, Cummins 1962). The median substrate size (D50) was calculated for
each cross-section and averaged for each study zone.
Thorough one-pass sampling of the fish community was conducted of all habitats
within each sampling site. The sites were unblocked, and effort (time actively sampling)
was recorded. Backpack, tow barge, and boat electrofishing equipment were used as
appropriate for each river, but the equipment used was constant within each river. All
fish sampled were netted, identified to species, and released (with the exception of
“voucher specimens” that were retained for further identification in the laboratory). Total
species richness (number of fish species) and relative numeric abundance of all fish
species were calculated for each study zone. The similarity of fish communities in each
study zone of a river was evaluated using the Morista similarity index (Morista 1959).
This index takes into account both the differences in which species are present and
differences in the numeric proportions of those species present. An index value of 0.00
indicates complete dissimilarity, a value of 1.00 indicates complete similarity, and values
greater than 0.60 are generally interpreted as “similar” (Angradi and Griffith 1990).
One of our study rivers, the Pine River, was part of a long-term investigation, and
provided comparable but more detailed data. The data collection methods utilized were
identical to those reported for this study (Burroughs 2007a, Burroughs 2007b). Data
were selected from that dataset to match those acquired at that other past dam
removals in this study (e.g., one pass fish sampling, matched cross-section sites), for
both fluvial geomorphology and fish community characteristics. Repeated samples for
each characteristic were drawn from the Pine River dataset from before and after the
dam removal.
RESULTS
Fluvial Geomorphology
Only small differences in water temperature were observed between study zones
following dam removal (Figure 3). Water temperatures in both the former impoundment
zones and downstream zones showed very little deviation from water temperatures
seen in the upstream references. This was observed for all past dam removals studied,
indicating that once a dam and impoundment were removed, its effects on water
temperature were almost immediately ameliorated.
In former impoundment reaches, slope was similar to or greater than reference
levels, in all but one case, and this process appeared to occur within just a few years
following dam removal (Figure 4). Differences in slope downstream of dam removals
appeared more variable. Several downstream reaches had slopes greater than
reference levels, while others had lower slopes than reference levels even 8 -15 years
after dam removal. In the two oldest dam removals, greater than 30 years post-dam
removal, slopes of both former impoundments and downstream reaches were similar or
greater than reference reaches.
Width to mean depth of the wetted channel (W/D) is a unitless ratio describing
the shape of the river channel cross-section morphology; higher W/D indicates a wide
shallow river channel and a lower W/D indicates a narrow and deep river channel.
Former impoundment zones generally had higher W/D than reference zones, but

8

9

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

0

5

10

20

25

Years Since Dam Removal

15

30

Dow nstream

35

Former Impoundment

Upstream Reference

Figure 3. Mean water temperature for each study zone, recorded from 7/29/05 – 10/2/05.

Water Tem perature (C)

40

10

-100

-50

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

0

5

10

20

25

Years Since Dam Removal

15

30

35

Dow nstream

Former Impoundment

40

Figure 4. Percent difference in slope for former impoundment and downstream zones, compared to slope in
reference zones. Arrows connect data points from the Pine River, indicating the trajectory
observed before to after the removal of Stronach Dam.

Percent Difference in Slope from
Reference

appeared to decrease in W/D following dam removal, approaching reference level W/D
by approximately 10 years (Figure 5). Downstream of dams, sediment transport and
deposition appeared to increase W/D of the wetted channel immediately following dam
removal, but eventually reference level W/D were achieved by 30 years post dam
removal (Figure 5).
Sinuosity of the river channel in all three study zones was measured for multiple
years at each dam removal site, and no changes were observed (Figure 6). At some
rivers, both former impoundment and downstream zones were more sinuous than
reference zones, and in other study rivers they were less sinuous. However, in all
cases the sinuosity of the river channel in the former impoundment and downstream
zones remained stable following dam removal.
Median substrate sizes in former impoundments and downstream zones were
generally smaller than reference zones shortly following dam removal. One exception
occurred where substrate in the former impoundment and downstream had coarsened
to levels slightly higher than in the reference, just two years following dam removal, and
in another case (excluded from graphical presentation) median substrate size was far
greater than reference levels due to frequent boulders and bedrock in the waterfall-filled
former impoundment and downstream zones. On average, substrate appears to begin
coarsening slightly in the former impoundment immediately following dam removal,
while the downstream zone shows very little substrate coarsening (Figure 7). The
oldest dam removal cases studied, greater than 30 years post-removal, showed median
substrates sizes in both former impoundments and downstream zones that were larger
than those of the reference zones, indicating that restoration of substrate coarseness is
possible following dam removal.
Bedform diversity was generally lower in the former impoundment than reference
zones, following dam removal (Figure 8). The diversity of bedforms appears to increase
following dam removal, with a greater rate of increase in the former impoundment zone
than for the downstream zone. However, the diversity of bedforms in the former
impoundment zones was still lower than reference zones even after 30 years post-dam
removal. In the downstream zones, bedform diversity was more variable, with many of
the sites attaining reference-level bedform diversity, while others remained less diverse.
The seven-year post-dam removal study site, the Falls River, remained an exception to
the general trends (excluded from graphical presentation). In this river, the reference
zone was lower gradient and contained more run bedforms, while the impoundment and
downstream zones were extremely high gradient, and contained extensive waterfall
bedforms.
Fish Community Composition and Productivity
Fish species richness differed between study zones for several years following
dam removal, but by approximately 5 years post-dam removal fish species richness was
similar between all three zones (Figure 9). Morista similarity index values also were
similar for all zones within only a few years (Figure 10). The 7 year post-removal site
remained an exception to fish community changes, due to waterfalls in the former
impoundment and downstream zones which affected fish species distributions and
prevented the influx of several species from Lake Superior.

11

12

-30

-10

10

30

50

70

90

110

130

150

0

5

10

20

25

Years Since Dam Removal

15

30

Dow nstream

35

Former Impoundment

40

Figure 5. Percent difference in wetted width to depth ratio (w/d) for former impoundment and downstream
zones, compared to w/d in reference zones. Arrows connect data points from the Pine River,
indicating the trajectory observed before to after the removal of Stronach Dam.

Percent Difference in Width/Depth
Ration from Reference

13

-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

60

80

0

5

10

20

25

Years Since Dam Removal

15

30

35

Former
Impoundment

Downstream

40

Figure 6. Percent difference in sinuosity for former impoundment and downstream zones, compared to
sinuosity in reference zones. Connected data points indicate the sinuosity of the same study
zone, measured at different dates through aerial photos.

Percent Difference in Sinuosity from
Reference

14

-200

-150

-100

-50

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

0

5

10

20

25

Years Since Dam Removal

15

30

35

Dow nstream

Former Impoundment

40

Figure 7. Percent difference in median substrate size for former impoundment and downstream zones,
compared to median substrate size in reference zones. Arrows connect data points from the Pine
River, indicating the trajectory observed before to after the removal of Stronach Dam.

Percent Difference in Median Substrate
Size from Reference

15

Percent Difference in Diversity

0

5

10

20

25

Years Since Dam Removal

15

30

35

Dow nstream

Former Impoundment

40

Figure 8. Percent difference in the diversity of bedforms for former impoundment and downstream zones,
compared to reference zones. Arrows connect data points from the Pine River, indicating the
trajectory observed before to after the removal of Stronach Dam. Shannon-Weaver diversity index
used.

-120

-100

-80

-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

16

-100

-50

0

50

100

150

200

250

0

5

10

20

25

Years Since Dam Removal

15

Waterfalls affecting fish
distribution

30

35

Dow nstream

Former Impoundment

40

Figure 9. Percent difference in fish species richness for former impoundment and downstream zones,
compared to fish species richness in reference zones. Arrows connect data points from the
Pine River, indicating the trajectory observed before to after the removal of Stronach Dam.

Percent Difference in Species
Richness from Reference

17

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

0

5

10

20

25

30

Years Since Dam Removal

15

Waterfalls affecting fish
distribution

35

40

Dow nstream

Former Impoundment

45

Figure 10. Morista similarity indices of fish community numeric composition, for former impoundment and
downstream zones, compared to reference zones. Similarity indices of 0.00 denote complete
dissimilarity, 1.00 denotes complete similarity, and indices greater than 0.60 indicate “similar”
fish community compositions. Arrows connect data points from the Pine River, indicating the
trajectory observed before to after the removal of Stronach Dam.

Fish Community Similarity

The total number of fish sampled in a study zone, adjusted for effort, was used
as a surrogate for the productivity of the fish community. Total number of fish in former
impoundment zones was relatively variable among rivers for the first 15 years or so, but
across all rivers from 0 – 39 years post-removal, shows a gradual increasing trend, from
slightly less fish than reference levels to slightly more than reference levels for the dam
removals >30 years old (Figure 11). Downstream zones show a more distinct trend in
lowered fish abundance immediately following dam removal, with lower fish abundances
for approximately 15 years post-removal, and higher fish abundances than reference
zones by >30 years post dam removal.
DISCUSSION
Fluvial Geomorphology
Dams can alter the river temperature in numerous ways (Ligon et al. 1995,
Collier et al. 1996). Lessard and Hayes (2003) found that in Michigan coldwater
streams, water temperature downstream of dams was on average, 2.7° C warmer than
upstream reference zones. These effects were thought to be caused by the warming of
water retained in the impoundment, and its subsequent release downstream. Dams can
also release water from the hypolimnion of an impoundment, lowering water
temperature substantially relative to upstream. The removal of a dam ameliorates
effects on water temperature almost immediately, as only very small differences in
water temperature were observed in any past dam removals in this study. The water
temperature effects of dams can be a major motivation and consideration in deciding
whether to remove dams. Dams can alter water temperatures in ways both detrimental
and beneficial to fisheries management. In some cases, water temperature can be
warmed by dams to levels that will not support coldwater fisheries resources (Lessard
and Hayes 2003, Hayes et al. in press). In other cases, coldwater releases downstream
of dams can create water temperatures cold enough to support coldwater fisheries not
otherwise possible, but displace native fish species not adapted to the colder water
temperatures (e.g., Martinez et al. 1994, Quinn and Kwak 2003). The results of this
study suggest that dam removal will restore water temperatures in impoundments and
downstream sections of rivers to levels similar to upstream references. Whether this
outcome of dam removal is viewed as desirable will depend on the fish community
goals, and will likely vary with the uniqueness of each river and its fish community.
Slope is a main variable driving many of the characteristics of a river channel and
fish habitat. Slope directly affects water velocity, thereby influencing channel
morphology and substrate size composition. Dams generally decrease water slope in
reservoirs through the impoundment of water and aggradation of sediment (Lane 1955,
Gordon et al. 2004). Sections of rivers downstream of dams also generally experience
decreased slope, through the degradation of the streambed immediately downstream of
dams. Following dam removal, slope increases through a reversal of these sediment
processes, as sediment degradation (i.e., incision) occurs in former impoundments and
sediment aggradation occurs downstream of dams (Figure 12). The recovery rate of
slope following dam removal will depend on how much sedimentation occurred in a
reservoir and how sediments are managed. In reservoirs with very little sediment fill,
dewatering the impoundment during removal will restore the slope of the former
impoundment nearly immediately. Reservoirs that contain large amounts of sediment

18

19

-100

-50

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

0

5

10

20

25

Years Since Dam Removal

15

30

Dow nstream

35

Former Impoundment

40

Figure 11. Percent difference in fish abundance (number of fish) for former impoundment and downstream
zones, compared to fish abundance in reference zones. Arrows connect data points from the Pine
River, indicating the trajectory observed before to after the removal of Stronach Dam.

Percent Difference in Number of Fish

20

Slope

Dam

Post-Dam

aggradation

degradation

Downstream

Reference

Impoundment

Figure 12. Hypothetical changes in the slope of sections of rivers affected by dams and dam
removals, and the sediment processes causing the changes in slopes.

Pre-Dam

degradation

aggradation

fill must undergo significant incision that could take several years to reach an
equilibrium. In this study, we observed sites in which slope was restored quickly and
others where slope recovered more slowly. These differences could be explained by
the amount of sediment contained in the impoundments prior to dam removal, natural
variation in the underlying slope of the river reaches the impoundments were
constructed on, or possibly by the methods used to remove the dams (e.g., staged
versus all-at-once dam removal). Understanding the influence of each possible
explanation will be difficult given the lack of pre-dam removal information available for
these past dam removal study sites. However, it appears that slope generally reaches
reference levels within 2 to 5 years following dam removal.
Immediately following dam removal, the lack of water impoundment immediately
decreases wetted width of the river channel and often the water depth. Further, in
impoundments that contain significant amounts of sediment fill, incision occurs vertically
downward through these sediments, forming a narrower river channel, and further
decreasing the width of the river channel and the W/D ratio. The results of this study
suggest that the equilibrium slope and W/D ratio will eventually become very similar to
reference conditions, but may take more than a decade for this new equilibrium channel
to form. Downstream of dams, increased sediment supply following dam removal
generally aggrades the streambed and increases both slope and W/D of the river
channel. So whereas the impoundment zones move toward restoration of channel form
immediately following dam removal, the downstream zones often move away from
reference conditions immediately following dam removal. The results of this study
suggest that river channels downstream of dam removals eventually move toward
reference conditions, but require more time to achieve these conditions, perhaps 20
years or more. Reference conditions were observed in the downstream zones for the
dam removals >30 years old, indicating that restoration of channel form is possible. One
notable exception occurred with implications for how dams are removed. The Randall
Dam on the Coldwater River was removed in 2002, during which a sediment collection
basin was operated immediately downstream of the dam (D. Zebell personal
communication). This prevented large amounts of sediment from impacting the
downstream zone of this river. Consequently, many of the negative impacts of
sediment deposition, including increased W/D of the river channel were not observed.
Sinuosity in former impoundments and downstream zones did not change
following dam removal. Despite large amounts of vertical incision observed at some
dam removals (Stanley et al. 2002, Burroughs 2007a), substantial lateral erosion
through the floodplain was not observed. Sinuosity of a river channel influences the
slope and subsequently the equilibrium channel shape. Sinuosity also affects the
formation of pool bedforms at the outside corners of meanders, and affects the rate of
wood debris recruitment and retention in rivers. It still remains uncertain whether river
channels will revert to pre-dam removal river channels or whether new river channels
will form through accumulated reservoir sediment fill. Managers may decide upon
desirable locations of new river channels formed following dam removal, and the
equilibrium slope and sinuosity of these post-dam removal channels, based on various
management objectives. However, it is important to realize that sinuosity does not
seem to change significantly following dam removal, so desired sinuosity should be
considered prior to dam removal as part of an integrated dam removal plan.

21

As slope increases in former impoundment and downstream zones, water
velocity increases, and substrate size composition coarsens slightly. This begins soon
after dam removal in the impoundment zone, and later in the downstream zone if the
reservoir sediment fill is allowed to be transported and deposited downstream.
However, the median substrate size of reference zones is reflective of higher, more
infrequent flow events. Even as substrate size coarsens in impoundment and
downstream zones, the median substrate size would not be expected to coarsen to
reference levels for many years or decades, until several high flow events have
occurred. Results from this study suggest that substrate in former impoundments and
downstream zones can become as coarse as seen in reference zones following dam
removal. This substrate coarsening could be achieved shortly after dam removal if
active sediment management efforts are employed (i.e., dredging, or passive
collection), or if a large, infrequent flow event happens to occur shortly after the dam
removal. In most cases however, it appears as though several decades may be
required in order to achieve the full restoration of substrate coarseness following dam
removal.
Similar to substrate coarseness, the creation of bedforms is controlled by
infrequent high flow events, often 5 -10 year recurrence interval floods, that possess
sufficient energy to scour pools and transport and deposit large substrates, forming
riffles (Petts and Foster 1985, Knighton 1984, and Beschta and Platts 1986, as cited in
Gordon et al. 2004, and Pizzuto 2002). Bedforms can also be created secondarily by
other localized structures or events such as wood debris or bank slumping. In this study
we observed an increase in bedform diversity in former impoundment and downstream
zones following dam removal, but full restoration of bedform frequency was
inconsistent, even decades following dam removal.
In the case of the Stronach Dam removal on the Pine River, the former
impoundment was almost entirely run bedform prior to dam removal (Burroughs 2007a).
Eight years after the dam removal, the proportion of run bedform had decreased with
increases in riffle and pool bedforms, but the diversity of bedforms was still less than
observed in the reference zone. The results of this study suggest that while bedform
diversity may improve in former impoundments following dam removal, the process will
be slow, and reference-level bedform diversity may not be achieved. Several of the
downstream zones in this study did attain reference-level bedform diversity. The two
downstream study zones that remained low in bedform diversity were both low gradient
and emptied into other impoundments. This situation may reduce sediment transport
ability during high flows and slow or prevent the reformation of diverse bedforms
downstream of dam removals.
Bedform diversity influences sediment transport and sorting, nutrient cycling, and
is important to the habitat suitability of stream biota (Gordon et al. 2004). Given the lack
of bedform restoration in impoundments following dam removal, managers may need to
consider actively restoring bedforms following dam removal.
Fish Community Composition and Productivity
While many aspects of the fluvial geomorphology of rivers seem to be restored
eventually following dam removal, changes that occur to the fish community can not
necessarily be seen as restoration. With the initiation of fish passage following dam

22

removal, often quite different fish assemblages are allowed to intermix, and interact with
varying habitat conditions. The result is a new and different fish community following
dam removal, throughout all of the zones.
Hill et al. (1994) found that species richness increased in the Chipola River,
Florida following dam removal. Kanehl et al. (1997) found index of biotic integrity
scores increased in the Milwaukee River, Wisconsin following dam removal; and
Burroughs (2007b) found fish species richness, diversity, and similarity of numeric
community composition increased in all three zones (reference, former impoundment,
and downstream) following the removal of Stronach Dam on the Pine River, Michigan.
Results from this study support these other findings, in that the similarity of species
richness and numeric composition between study zones increased very quickly, within
just a few years following dam removal. Again, these changes are not necessarily
interpreted as restoration of original “pre-dam” fish communities, but rather
homogenization of fish assemblages within a river. Fisheries managers faced with
potential dam removals will need to decide whether these changes are desirable for a
specific river.
The trends in fish abundances after dam removal follow many of the changes in
fish habitat observed in this study. Many aspects of fish habitat were observed to
change immediately following dam removal, such as water temperature and slope.
These changes will immediately alter the suitability of the habitat in former
impoundment and downstream zones, leading to changes in the fish communities and
fish abundances in each zone. These immediate changes alter the former
impoundment to reflect more reference-like lotic conditions, while downstream zones
are often inundated with sediment transport and deposition from the incision process in
the former impoundment. This leads to wider and shallower river channels, and smaller
sized, unstable substrates. Correspondingly, fish abundances in downstream zones
were lowered to levels far below those of the reference zones, taking several decades
to recover. Bushaw-Newton et al. (2002) also observed decreased fish abundance
downstream of a dam removal in Pennsylvania immediately following dam removal.
Other important aspects of fish habitat were observed to take much longer
amounts of time to recover after dam removal. The frequency of different bedforms
such as riffles or pools are fundamentally important to the survival and feeding needs of
different life stages of almost all stream fishes. Substrate coarseness is also related to
the spawning requirements of many stream fishes, the survival needs of many juvenile
fish as holding cover, and the productivity of macroinvertebrate communities which
serve as food for many stream fishes. These important attributes of fish habitat were
observed to require long periods of time post-dam removal to be improved or restored.
It should not be surprising then, that fish community productivity as measured by fish
abundance, also required a long period of time (~20 – 30 years) post-dam removal in
order to reach levels seen in upstream reference habitat. Fisheries managers hoping to
improve the productivity of a fish community through dam removal, may need to
consider active restoration of key fish habitat attributes such as substrate composition
and bedform diversity, if the full potential benefits of dam removal are to be achieved
within short management timeframes.

23

Synthesis
While the results of this study were derived from a limited number of dam
removal case studies, they provide the first empirical estimates of the timeframes
required for various attributes of rivers and their fish to recover or change following dam
removal, and also generate novel insights into the trajectories these changes may
follow. Many of the aspects of river form and function appear to be restored through
dam removals. However, many of the most important aspects of fish habitat may take
several decades to be restored, and the full benefits of dam removal won’t be achieved
until those aspects of fish habitat are recovered.
These results give guidance on where to best spend limited funds directed at
dam removals and associated active restoration. Sinuosity did not change following
dam removal, and bedform diversity and substrate coarseness took long amounts of
time to improve or be restored. If active restoration is feasible following dam removal,
efforts aimed at creating meanders, pool and riffle forming structures and coarsening
substrate, could help to speed the restoration of these important habitat attributes and
lead to a faster realization of the full potential benefits of dam removal.
Deciding on whether dam removal is good for a fish community will always
require consideration of the uniqueness of the river, the fish assemblages surrounding
the dam removal in question, and their preferred uses and states. Dam removal allows
mixing of species from downstream and upstream of dams. This will allow all fish to
access and sample all habitats available to them and select those that best fulfill their
life history requirements. This appears to lead to higher species richness, higher
similarity of fish communities upstream and downstream of dams, and higher diversity.
While Hill et al. (1994), Kanehl et al. (1997) and Burroughs (2007b) all observed
increases in abundances of desirable sportfishes, along with increased species richness
following dam removal, changes in fish habitat and new species interactions could have
detrimental effects for some desirable fish species. In order to make a decision on the
desirability of suspected outcomes of potential dam removals, fisheries managers will
need to consider the fish species present in the river, those fishes’ habitat requirements,
and the projected changes to habitat expected due to dam removal.
Surveying the outcomes of past dam removals, even with limited sample size,
has revealed valuable insights, including the extent of restoration possible with dam
removal, and the timeframes required for restoration. Pohl (2003) estimated that more
than 400 dams have been removed in the U.S. to date. There is great potential for
researchers to apply this methodology to the study of other past dam removals. As
more of these past dam removals are studied, more reliable estimates of the timeframes
of restoration of different attributes will be possible, the timeframes could be calibrated
to specific geological or ecological regions, and the influence of starting conditions on
time-to-restoration could be examined. For example, if particular starting conditions
exist prior to dam removal, and they are known to lead to faster restoration times,
decisions can be made whether to conduct active restoration or whether passive
restoration would be sufficiently fast. Also, as more dams are removed in the future
with active site restoration conducted (e.g., sediment collection and removal, natural
channel design), the effectiveness of these efforts can be evaluated by whether or not
they lead to faster restoration than average timeframes with just passive, natural
restoration; and cost-effectiveness of dam removals can be improved.

24

LITERATURE CITED

Angradi, T. R., and J. S. Griffith. 1990. Diel feeding chronology and diet selection
of rainbow trout (Onchorynchus mykiss) in the Henry’s Fork of the Snake
River, Idaho. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences,
47:199-209.
Bain, M.B., J.T. Finn, and H.E. Booke. 1988. Streamflow regulation and fish
community structure. Ecology 69(2):382-392.
Benke, A.C. 1990. A perspective on America’s vanishing streams. Journal of the
North American Benthological Society 9(1):77-88.
Beschta, R.L. and Platts, W.S. 1986. Morphological features of small streams:
significance and function. Water Resources Bulletin, 22: 369-79.
Burroughs, B.A. 2007a. The effects of Stronach Dam removal on fluvial
geomorphology of the Pine River, Manistee Co., Michigan. Chapter 1 of
“The effects of dam removal on fluvial geomorphology and fish; a
dissertation of the Department of Fisheries & Wildlife, Michigan State
University.
Burroughs, B.A. 2007b. The effects of Stronach Dam removal on fish
in the Pine River, Manistee Co., Michigan. Chapter 2 of “The effects of
dam removal on fluvial geomorphology and fish; a dissertation of the
Department of Fisheries & Wildlife, Michigan State University.
Bushaw-Newton, K.L., Hart, D.D., Pizzuto, J.E., Thomson, J.R., Egan, J., Ashley,
J.T., Johnson, T.E., Horwitz, R.K., Keeley, M., Lawrence, J., Charles, D.,
Gatenby, C., Kreeger, D.A., Nightengale, T., Thomas, R.L., and D.J.
Velinsky. 2002. An integrative approach towards understanding ecological
responses to dam removal: the Manatawny Creek study. Journal of the
American Water Resources Association, 38: (6) 1581-1599.
Chaplin, J.J. 2003. Framework for monitoring and preliminary results after
removal of Good Hope Mill Dam. Chapter 8 in; Dam removal research:
status and prospects. W.L. Graf editor. The H. John Heinz III Center for
Science, Economics and the Environment; Washington, D.C.
Collier, M., Webb, R.H., and J.C. Schmidt. 1996. Dams and rivers: primer on the
downstream effects of dams. U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1126,
Denver, CO 94 p.
Cummins, K.W. 1962. An evaluation of some techniques for the collection and
analysis of benthic samples with special emphasis on lotic waters.
American Midland Naturalist 67:477-504.
Cushman, R.M. 1985. Review of ecological effects of rapidly varying flows
downstream from hydroelectric facilities. North American Journal of
Fisheries Management 5:330-339.
Doyle, M.W., E.H. Stanley, and J.M. Harbor 2002. Predicting channel response
to dam removal using geomorphic analogies. Journal of American Water
Resources Association, 38:1567-1579.
Doyle, M.W. et al. 2005. Stream ecosystem response to small dam removal:
lessons from the heartland. Geomorphology, 71: (2005) 227-244.

25

Evans, J.E., S.D. Mackey, J.F. Gottgens, and W.M. Gill. 2000. Lessons from a
dam failure. Ohio Journal of Science 100(5):121-131.
Gordon, N.D., McMahon, T.A., Finlayson, B.L., Gippel, C.J., and R.J. Nathan.
2004. Stream hydrology: an introduction for ecologists. Second Edition. J.
Wiley & Sons Ltd. England.
Hayes, D. B., H. R. Dodd, and J. L. Lessard. In press. Conservation
considerations for small dams on coldwater streams. Proceedings of the
4th World Fisheries Congress. May 2_6, 2004, Vancouver, BC
Hicks, B.J., and N.R.N. Watson. 1985. Seasonal changes in abundance of brown
trout (Salmo trutta) and rainbow trout (S. gairdnerii) assessed by drift
diving in the Rangitkei river, New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Marine
and Freshwater Research 19:1-10.
Hill, M.J., E.A. Long, and S. Hardin. 1994. Effects of dam removal on Dead Lake,
Chipola River, Florida. Proceedings of the Annual Conference SEAFWA: 512523.
Holden, P.B. 1979. Ecology of riverine fishes in regulated streams with emphasis
on the Colorado River. Pages 57-74. In: J.V. Ward and J.A. Stanford
(editors) Ecology of Regulated Streams, Plenum Press, New York.
Francisco, E. 2004. Tales of the Undammed: removing barriers doesn’t
automatically restore river health. Science News. April 10, 2004, vol. 165,
no. 15.
Kanehl, P., D.J. Lyons, and J.E. Nelson. 1997. Changes in the habitat and fish
community of the Milwaukee River, Wisconsin, following removal of the
Woolen Mills Dam. North American Journal of Fisheries Management 17:387400.
Knighton, D. 1984. Fluvial forms and processes. Edward Arnold, London.
Kondolf, G.M., and S. Li. 1992. The pebble count technique for quantifying
surface bed material size in instream flow studies. Rivers 3(2):80-87.
Lane, E.W. 1955. The importance of fluvial morphology in hydraulic
engineering. ASCE Proc. 81: (745).
Lessard, J.L. and Hayes, D.B. 2003. Effects of elevated water temperature on
fish and macroinvertebrate communities below small dams. River
Research and Applications 19:721-732.
Ligon, F.K., W.E. Dietrich, and W.J. Trush. 1995. Downstream ecological effects
of dams. Bioscience 45(3):183-192.
Martinez, P.J., Chart, T.E., Trammell, M.A., Wullschleger, J.G, and E.P.
Bergersen. 1994. Fish species composition before and after construction
of a main stem reservoir on the White River, Colorado. Environmental
Biology of Fishes 40: 227-239.
Morista, M. 1959. Measuring of interspecific association and similarity between
communities. Memoirs of the Faculty Science Kyushu University, Series E
Biology 3:65-80.
Petts, G.E. 1980. Long-term consequences of upstream impoundment.
Environmental Conservation 7(4):325-332.

26

Petts, G.E. and Foster, I. 1985. Rivers and landscape. Edward Arnold, London.
Pizzuto, J. 2002. Effects of dam removal on river form and process. Bioscience
52(8):683-691.
Pohl, M. 2003. American dam removal census: available data and data needs.
Chapter 2 in; Dam removal research: status and prospects. W.L. Graf
editor. The H. John Heinz III Center for Science, Economics and the
Environment; Washington, D.C.
Pringle, C.M., Freeman, M.C., and B.J. Freeman. 2000. Regional effects of
hydrologic alterations on riverine macrobiota in the New World: tropicaltemperate comparisons. Bioscience Vol. 50, No. 9: 807-823.
Quinn, J.W. and T.J. Kwak. 2003. Fish assemblage changes in an Ozark river
after impoundment: a long-term perspective. Transactions of the American
Fisheries Society 132:110-119.
Ricklefs, R.E. 1990. The economy of nature: a textbook in basic ecology. Fourth
edition. W.H. Freeman and Co., New York. Pp. 516-517.
Shannon, C.E. and W. Weaver. 1949. The mathematical theory of
communication. Urbana, IL., Univ. of Ill. Press.
Shields, F.D., Simon, A., and L.J. Steffen. 2000. Reservoir effects on
downstream river channel migration. Environmental Conservation 27 (1):
54-66.
Stanley, E.H., M.A. Luebke, M.W. Doyle, and D.W. Marshall. 2002. Short-term
changes in channel form and macroinvertebrate communities following
low-head dam removal. Journal of the North American Benthological
Society 21(1):172-187.
Ward, J.V., and J.A. Stanford. 1989. Riverine ecosystems: the influence of man
on catchment dynamics and fish ecology. Pages 56-64 in D.P. Dodge
editor. Proceedings of the International Large River Symposium. Canadian
Special Publication of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 106.
Wentworth, C.K. 1922. A scale of grade and class for elastic sediments. Journal
of Geology 30:377-392.
Williams, G.P., and M.G. Wolman. 1984. Downstream effects of dams on alluvial
rivers. Professional paper 1286. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Geological
Survey.
Wolman, M.G. 1954. A method of sampling coarse river-bed material.
Transactions of the American Geophysical Union 35(6):951-956.
Zebell, D.A. Personal Communication. Senior Civil Engineer, Lawson-Fisher
Associates P.C.. Consulting firm responsible of the removal of the Randall
Dam on the Coldwater River, Branch Co., MI, in 2002.

27

